IndependentProject/IndependentProject.md, before:

# Seeking Biological Patterns in Inspiration

## Sorta-Biological Question

Can the patterns associated with two biological principles, mast seeding and competitive exclusion, be found in a non-biological data set?

## Context

Inspiration has remained an ambigious phenomenon, long unstudied by psychology (Thrash, Moldovan, Oleynick, and Maruskin 2014). In this dearth of research, establishing whether certain patterns exist in inspiration might be helpful in guiding future studies.  
Using biology as inspiration is nothing new—there's a field of engineering called "biomimetic design" which does exactly that. The two processes chosen, mast seeding and competitive exclusion, are useful because they are analogous to aspects of inspiration which are sometimes anecdotally reported:
* If as some claim, there are some days when "the Muse is with you" and others were it is absent, we should expect to find a pattern akin to mast seeding. 
* Some writers report that a particular project or idea will seize hold so firmly that it prevents other ideas from forming. If true, this would be analogous to competitive exclusion, with the dominant project outcompeting others for limited attention and time.

## Methods

#### Data Source

This being a personal data set, there is no published data package outside of this repository.  
Data collection began in October of 2017, at a time when I finally had more ideas for stories than I could safely entrust to memory. Wanting to understand where they were coming from, the data were recorded systematically.

Ideas were written down as they occurred, with a header for each date and one or multiple notes below it. In the margin before the body of the idea a project moniker was written to keep track of which story, essay, or poem that particular idea belonged to.

The data set's handwritten form currently extends over 6 notebooks of varying sizes and bindings. Because the data were recorded over two and half years, and because I experimented somewhat with use of color and symbols, the system of recording fluctuates. This, combined with my handwriting, made digitization more difficult than expected. I originally planned to use Optical Character Recognition (OCR) to automate the process, but it turns out using OCR for handwriting requires training a neural network to recognize it, and I didn't have a computer that I could spare days or weeks on training.



## References

Thrash, Todd, Emil Moldovan, Victoria Oleynick, and Laura Maruskin. 2014. "The Psychology of Inspiration." _Social and Personality Psychology Compass_ 8, no. 9: 495-510. [https://doi-org.colorado.idm.oclc.org/10.1111/spc3.12127](https://doi-org.colorado.idm.oclc.org/10.1111/spc3.12127)

Commit message:

update to project markdown doc

IndependentProject/IndependentProject.md, after:

# Seeking Biological Patterns in Inspiration

## Sorta-Biological Question

Can the patterns associated with two biological principles, mast seeding and competitive exclusion, be found in a non-biological data set?

## Context

Inspiration has remained an ambigious phenomenon, long unstudied by psychology (Thrash, Moldovan, Oleynick, and Maruskin 2014). In this dearth of research, establishing whether certain patterns exist in inspiration might be helpful in guiding future studies.  
Using biology as inspiration is nothing new—there's a field of engineering called "biomimetic design" which does exactly that. The two processes chosen, mast seeding and competitive exclusion, are useful because they are analogous to aspects of inspiration which are sometimes anecdotally reported:
* If as some claim, there are some days when "the Muse is with you" and others were it is absent, we should expect to find a pattern akin to mast seeding. 
* Some writers report that a particular project or idea will seize hold so firmly that it prevents other ideas from forming. If true, this would be analogous to competitive exclusion, with the dominant project outcompeting others for limited attention and time.

## Methods

#### Data Source

This being a personal data set, there is no published data package outside of this repository.  
Data collection began in October of 2017, at a time when I finally had more ideas for stories than I could safely entrust to memory. Wanting to understand where they were coming from, the data were recorded systematically.

Ideas were written down as they occurred, with a header for each date and one or multiple notes below it. In the margin before the body of the idea a project moniker was written to keep track of which story, essay, or poem that particular idea belonged to.

The data set's handwritten form currently extends over 6 notebooks of varying sizes and bindings. Because the data were recorded over two and half years, and because I experimented somewhat with use of color and symbols, the system of recording fluctuates. This, combined with my handwriting, made digitization more difficult than expected. I originally planned to use Optical Character Recognition (OCR) to automate the process, but it turns out using OCR for handwriting requires training a neural network to recognize it, and I didn't have a computer that I could spare days or weeks on training (I'll try it over summer).

This is the most intelligable result I got with standard OCR package tools.

![I swear the original text is in English](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pauleymg/compBioLabsAndHW/master/IndependentProject/OCRoutput.png)

#### The Analyses

In the first part, the data were transformed into a table based on the date and how many entries appeared for each date. This table of data was then graphed as a histogram and graphed to show the frequency of days on which a certain number of ideas were generated.

In the second part, the data were grouped by project

## References

Thrash, Todd, Emil Moldovan, Victoria Oleynick, and Laura Maruskin. 2014. "The Psychology of Inspiration." _Social and Personality Psychology Compass_ 8, no. 9: 495-510. [https://doi-org.colorado.idm.oclc.org/10.1111/spc3.12127](https://doi-org.colorado.idm.oclc.org/10.1111/spc3.12127)
